---
title: Ersilia explained to digital nomads
slug: cloud-citadel
author: [mduran]
date: 2021-01-30
excerpt: "Thoughts after my presentation at Cloud Citadel co-living space"
---

### Ersilia explained to digital nomads

A year ago, when we outlined the goals of Ersilia, we hoped we would be based somewhere far from Europe by the beginning of 2021. Building a useful machine-learning model requires deep understanding of the underlying data, including how and by whom it was collected, and strengthening capacity is key to achieve sustainable collaborations with LMIC institutions. I learned these lessons a few years ago, while working as a biomedical informatician in [Zambia](http://www.cidrz.org) and [Mozambique](https://www.isglobal.org/en/mozambique#). Being a computational biologist in a low-resourced country is not easy (power cuts can be 15 hours long), but one thing is for certain: today, the only research in biology that is both cheap and cutting-edge is done with computers. This is why we started Ersilia in the first place.

The current pandemic has obviously affected our plans. One month into 2021 and Ersilia is still operating remotely (i.e. suboptimally) with its early adopters, including partners in Cameroon, South Africa and Kenya. I am writing these words from a co-living space named [Cloud Citadel](https://cloudcitadel.co/), settled in the midst of the French Alps, inside the old fortress of Briançon. An unlikely base for a not-for-profit enterprise aiming at making an impact in sub-Saharan Africa. A short and enjoyable limbo, nonetheless.

My co-workers are exactly what you would expect: software developers, graphic designers, digital marketing freelancers and cryptocurrency enthusiasts, aged 30-40 and proud of the digital nomad lifestyle. Remarkable people, I would say, especially when you observe their working habits, driven by self-awareness, office comfort and a priority for work-life balance. Two days ago, as part of a weekly skills-share session, I had the opportunity to present the Ersilia Open Source Initiative to this audience. I was curious to see their reaction, as these are highly-qualified individuals that are hardly impressed by the conventional attention baits that I too often use in presentations. Namely, publications in high-profile journals, machine learning & big data buzzwords, and number of international collaborations.

As it turns out, it was a joyful session. Free from the pressure for convincing funders down the path, and free from the need of putting up a track record that is currently, and necessarily, an illusion given our short life as an enterprise. In a nutshell, I explained the basics of computational biology, starting from DNA, followed by RNA, then proteins, metabolites, and finally cells (tissues, organisms, populations and ecosystems were not covered for brevity’s sake; and because they are not my expertise, really). I am always impressed by the fascination triggered by the central dogma of biology (DNA-RNA-proteins-etc.). People seem satisfied in front of the slide, as if I was explaining something they didn’t know they knew. Likewise, seeing their faces I am always reminded of the plastic beauty of biology, which makes me think that data visualization may be the most neglected aspect of computational biology. Protein 3D structures and large biological networks are awe-inspiring graphical materials only enabled by software published, at best, in low-profile scientific journals. We scientists live with the anxiety of presenting something novel every time we speak, and often forget that the grounds of our field, as dull as they may sound to us, provide the most attractive narrative. Perhaps the only one the audience will care about.

This is my main takeaway of the presentation I gave at Cloud Citadel. Ersilia needs to work towards a discourse that goes beyond (or stops before) the virtues of our own scientific research. There is no need to over-proof that Ersilia's tools are cutting-edge. For most purposes, in the context of LMICs where computational biology is practically nonexistent, the field is mature enough as is. What the audience (be them digital nomads, potential donors or future collaborators) will listen to are the real-world problems that will be addressed. Problems that, without the aid of the computers, would remain untackled. It sounds obvious, but it is not when you are putting up a slide deck and you are expected to outcompete an endless list of equally valuable initiatives.
