# Publications

The backbone technology of Ersilia is the [Chemical Checker](https://bioactivitysignatures.org), a technology developed at [IRB Barcelona](http://irbbarcelona.org) by our chief scientist. These are five publications strongly related to the Ersilia hub:
* Bertoni, **Duran-Frigola** et al. Bioactivity descriptors for uncharacterized compounds. *BioRXiV*, 2020 [[abstract](#bioactivity-signatures), [publication](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.21.214197v2.full)]
* **Duran-Frigola** et al. Bioactivity profile similarities to expand the repertoire of COVID-19 drugs. *J Chem Inf Mod*, 2020 [[abstract](#similarity-search-against-covid-19), [publication](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00420)]
* **Duran-Frigola** et al. Extending the small molecule similarity principle to all levels of biology. *Nat Biotechnol*, 2020 [[abstract](#chemical-checker), [publication](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-020-0502-7)]
* **Duran-Frigola** et al. Formatting biological big data for modern machine learning in drug discovery. *WIREs Comput Mol Sci*, 2019 [[abstract](#formating-biological-big-data), [publication](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/wcms.1408)]
* **Duran-Frigola**, Rossell, Aloy. A chemo-centric view of human health and disease. *Nat Commun*, 2014 [[abstract](#a-chemo-centric-view-of-human-health), [publication](https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms6676)]

For a full list of publications, please see [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=s71Wrc8AAAAJ&hl=en).

## Abstracts

### Bioactivity signatures

Chemical descriptors encode the physicochemical and structural properties of small molecules, and they are at the core of chemoinformatics. The broad release of bioactivity data has prompted enriched representations of compounds, reaching beyond chemical structures and capturing their known biological properties. Unfortunately, ‘bioactivity descriptors’ are not available for most small molecules, which limits their applicability to a few thousand well characterized compounds. Here we present a collection of deep neural networks able to infer bioactivity signatures for any compound of interest, even when little or no experimental information is available for them. Our ‘signaturizers’ relate to bioactivities of 25 different types (including target profiles, cellular response and clinical outcomes) and can be used as drop-in replacements for chemical descriptors in day-to-day chemoinformatics tasks. Indeed, we illustrate how inferred bioactivity signatures are useful to navigate the chemical space in a biologically relevant manner, unveiling higher-order organization in natural product collections, and to enrich mostly uncharacterized chemical libraries for activity against the drug-orphan target Snail1. Moreover, we implement a battery of signature-activity relationship (SigAR) models and show a substantial improvement in performance, with respect to chemistry-based classifiers, across a series of biophysics and physiology activity prediction benchmarks.

### Similarity search against COVID-19

Until a vaccine becomes available, the current repertoire of drugs is our only therapeutic asset to fight the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. Indeed, emergency clinical trials have been launched to assess the effectiveness of many marketed drugs, tackling the decrease of viral load through several mechanisms. Here, we present an online resource, based on small-molecule bioactivity signatures and natural language processing, to expand the portfolio of compounds with potential to treat COVID-19. By comparing the set of drugs reported to be potentially active against SARS-CoV-2 to a universe of 1 million bioactive molecules, we identify compounds that display analogous chemical and functional features to the current COVID-19 candidates. Searches can be filtered by level of evidence and mechanism of action, and results can be restricted to drug molecules or include the much broader space of bioactive compounds. Moreover, we allow users to contribute COVID-19 drug candidates, which are automatically incorporated to the pipeline once per day. The computational platform, as well as the source code, is available at https://sbnb.irbbarcelona.org/covid19.

### Chemical Checker

Small molecules are usually compared by their chemical structure, but there is no unified analytic framework for representing and comparing their biological activity. We present the Chemical Checker (CC), which provides processed, harmonized and integrated bioactivity data on ~800,000 small molecules. The CC divides data into five levels of increasing complexity, from the chemical properties of compounds to their clinical outcomes. In between, it includes targets, off-targets, networks and cell-level information, such as omics data, growth inhibition and morphology. Bioactivity data are expressed in a vector format, extending the concept of chemical similarity to similarity between bioactivity signatures. We show how CC signatures can aid drug discovery tasks, including target identification and library characterization. We also demonstrate the discovery of compounds that reverse and mimic biological signatures of disease models and genetic perturbations in cases that could not be addressed using chemical information alone. Overall, the CC signatures facilitate the conversion of bioactivity data to a format that is readily amenable to machine learning methods.

### Formatting biological big data

Biological data is accumulating at an unprecedented rate, escalating the role of data‐driven methods in computational drug discovery. This scenario is favored by recent advances in machine learning algorithms, which are optimized for huge datasets and consistently beat the predictive performance of previous art, rapidly approaching human expert reasoning. The urge to couple biological data to cutting‐edge machine learning has spurred developments in data integration and knowledge representation, especially in the form of heterogeneous, multiplex and semantically‐rich biological networks. Today, thanks to the propitious rise in knowledge embedding techniques, these large and complex biological networks can be converted to a vector format that suits the majority of machine learning implementations. Here, we explain why this can be particularly transformative for drug discovery where, for decades, customary chemoinformatics methods have employed vector descriptors of compound structures as the standard input of their prediction tasks. A common vector format to represent biology and chemistry may push biological information into most of the existing steps of the drug discovery pipeline, boosting the accuracy of predictions and uncovering connections between small molecules and other biological entities such as targets or diseases.

### A chemo-centric view of human health

Efforts to compile the phenotypic effects of drugs and environmental chemicals offer the opportunity to adopt a chemo-centric view of human health that does not require detailed mechanistic information. Here we consider thousands of chemicals and analyse the relationship of their structures with adverse and therapeutic responses. Our study includes molecules related to the aetiology of 934 health-threatening conditions and used to treat 835 diseases. We first identify chemical moieties that could be independently associated with each phenotypic effect. Using these fragments, we build accurate predictors for approximately 400 clinical phenotypes, finding many privileged and liable structures. Finally, we connect two diseases if they relate to similar chemical structures. The resulting networks of human conditions are able to predict disease comorbidities, as well as identifying potential drug side effects and opportunities for drug repositioning, and show a remarkable coincidence with clinical observations.
